---
layout: post
title: AdventOfCode 2023
tags:
- coding
- programming
- advent of code
- python
- zig
date: 2023-12-01 15:42 +0000
---
It's that time of year again. Time to commit to participating in [AdventOfCode
2023](https://adventofcode.com/) only to not finish it. In seriousness, I've
tried to finish for a few years but always find other commitments get in the
way. Nevertheless, I am going to be doing Advent of Code 2023!

Instead of releasing a post per challenge (and utterly embarrassing myself when
they stop at day 4 like in 2019), I'll try and do more of a summary of some
days, either as I go or in the post Christmas period.

Initially, I wanted to use Advent of Code to jump start learning the [Zig
programming language](https://ziglang.org/). However, I found myself
floundering at the first hurdle, reading files into memory. Zig is quite a new
language, and as a consequence it has a sparse amount of documentation
associated with it. This really hindered by ability to build fast. For example,
the basic
[Reader](https://ziglang.org/documentation/master/std/#A;std:io.Reader) in the
Zig standard library is currently deprecated in favour of undocumented
alternatives, but other documentation hasn't been updated to reflect this.

So in the spirit of solving the actual Advent of Code challenges, I opted to
use [Python](https://www.python.org/) instead. And while I use Python often, I
wouldn't call myself an expert in it, and it definitely isn't my first choice
of language when faced with a problem. So hopefully solving the Advent of Code
challenges in it will brush up my Pythonic knowledge.

At time of writing, I've already solved the 2 Day 1 challenges. With the part 2
having an annoying gotcha around where number words can overlap in a string
which threw me for a moment. My solution to this included a Regular Expression
which helped shorten my code considerably.
