---
layout: post
title: 'Book Series: Mistborn'
tags:
- reading
- mistborn
- writing
- book
- review
---

Recently I finished reading the [Mistborn book series by Brandon
Sanderson](https://www.brandonsanderson.com/the-mistborn-saga-the-original-trilogy/),
a fantasy series set in his Cosmere setting. This is a brief review of that
series.

## Brief Spoiler Free Review

These books were great. I found the world building captivating. Sanderson
really sells the idea of a society divided into two distinct classes in an ash
and mist covered world, devoid of flowers and the colours we are all used to.

The magic systems presented in the book are logically consistent and easy to
understand. He introduces them in a good pace, constantly keeping the reader
intrigued. They interact well with the world and each other. Sanderson's adept
at describing what is happening without slowing down the action.

The characters are fantastic and well fleshed out. His description
of one character was so impressive that when I stumbled upon fan-art it matched
my visualisation of the character perfectly. Initially I did not like one of
the main characters but quickly changed my mind as they developed. The romance
sub-plot is well done, it's not too intrusive for those interested in the
fantasy world, but plays a good role in the later books.

There are parts that are slower. Especially in the second book. But I think
they build up the tension adequately. The characters help carry along any of
these slow parts.

If you're looking for a magical heist, mixed with toppling a continent spanning
"evil empire" I recommend these books. As the series continues, the stakes get
bigger, ending in a very satisfying conclusion.

There will be spoilers below for the three books, if what I said above sounds
interesting then **stop right here** and read them. They're available in
[print](https://amzn.to/3DBq9NO) and in [e-book](https://amzn.to/3DExID4) form.

## Book 1: Mistborn

<img
  alt='Book 1: Mistborn'
  src='{{ "assets/mistborn/Mistborn.jpg" | absolute_url  }}'
  class='blog-image'
/>

[Mistborn](https://amzn.to/3zzQycp) starts with a preview of what is to come.
It introduces one of the main characters, Kelsier, a half-skaa, half-noble with
the abilities of a Mistborn.  It also introduces the socio-political state of
the setting, with a noble interacting with an Obligator.

There's a lot of words to unpack there so here's a brief summary:

The Skaa are the "slave" people of the setting. They have no rights and are
essentially owned by the Lord Ruler, and leased to the nobles.

The Nobles are said to be the descendants of the Lord Ruler's friends and
allies. As a reward for their loyalty they were gifted the abilities of a
Mistborn. This trait is hereditary and has been passed down to their offspring.
Not all nobles have these abilities, but by virtue of their blood nobles have a
chance to inherit them.

A Mistborn is someone who can affect the world through magic known as
Allomancy. They do this by *burning* metals within that they have ingested.
They can do things such as push/pull on metal objects, detect sources of metal
in the world, influence emotions, detect others using metals, and hide
themselves or others from detection. There are people who only inherit one of
these powers, known as Mistings.

The Lord Ruler is an immortal man who defeated a great evil one thousand years
before the story begins. He controls the world through it's economy and his
control of a rare metal known as Atium.

A half-skaa is someone who had both noble and skaa blood. They're forbidden
from existing, mainly due to the hereditary nature of Allomancy.

Obligators are both the priests and clerks of the Lord Ruler. They are his
devout followers and are required to bare witness to all trade deals and
negotiations.

The world is covered by nightly mists that have been around since the Lord
Ruler's ascension, and ash often falls from the sky. This has rendered the
world mostly barren of colour.

After our introduction to Kelsier, the story starts proper with Vin, a teenaged
skaa thief who is part of a thieving crew run by a man named Camon. She is abused
and generally treated poorly by her boss and the other members of the crew, but
is kept around due to her "luck". The crew boss takes her on a risky mission
where he is impersonating a minor nobleman in front of an Obligator. Vin uses
her luck, which gets the attention of Kelsier who decides to recruit her from
her gang into the larger plot.

The larger plot turns out to be plan to overthrow the Lord Ruler and steal his
stash of Atium. Kelsier has a personal vendetta against the leader for having
his wife killed and himself imprisoned in the Lord Ruler's mines. We are
introduced to the key members of the crew: Ham, Breeze, Dockson, Spook and
Clubs. Each are Mistings capable of one of Allomancy power each. Kelsier
reveals to Vin that he and her are Mistborn, able to use all the Allomancy
powers, and begins training her.

The crew also consists of Yeden, the leader of the Skaa resistance. Who is
initially sceptical of Kelsier's plan. Eventually we are also introduced to
an imposter playing the role of Lord Renoux and a servant called Sazed, a
Terrisman servant.

Vin's role is revealed to her. She must act as a spy within the nobility and
poses as Renoux's niece. Sazed takes to training her to pose as a Lady whilst
she continues training with Kelsier and the others.

At her first ball Vin meets Elend Venture, the heir to one of the largest noble
houses in the capital city. She eventually develops feelings for him as the
story progresses.

Eventually, Kelsier convinces his brother Marsh to join in their scheme. Marsh
is the former leader of the Skaa rebellion and another Misting. His mission is
to infiltrate the policing branch of the Obligators. This branch features men
known as Steel Inquisitors. These are men with metal spikes for eyes and the
abilities of a Mistborn.

With all the pieces in place the plot follows their preparations and the
various problems that emerge. One part of the plan is to recruit, and train, a
rebel army. Another is to sew chaos amongst the noble families.

One major set-back is when their rebel army is all but wiped out in a foolish
maneuver by Yeden. Another is when Vin is nearly killed on a scouting mission
of the Lord Ruler's castle.

Eventually the climax occurs. One member of the crew sacrifices their life to
spark a full scale revolt within the city, and Vin has to confront the Lord
Ruler.

I've summarised this a lot. The book is over 500 pages long and contains much
interesting political intrigue, world building, and character development.
Vin's powers develop overtime. Her and Kelsier never seem overpowered, and even
though they possess all the magical powers of Allomancy, it becomes clear that
the rest of the crew are vital.

My favourite parts of this book is how the relationships between the crew are
portrayed and how Vin's character changes throughout the story. I especially
like the relationship between Vin and Sazed. The finale is brilliant, and the
aftermath perfectly leads onto the second book.

## Book 2: The Well of Ascension

<img
  alt='Book 2: The Well of Ascension'
  src='{{ "assets/mistborn/Well-of-Ascension.jpg" | absolute_url  }}'
  class='blog-image'
/>

During the first book we have had the journal of the legendary hero, Alendi,
revealed to us. It plays a pivotal role in that books finale. In this book it
is revealed that he was on a quest for the Well of Ascension. Book 2 picks up a
year after the first, the crew have remained to help govern the capital city
with Elend Venture having taken the role of king. Whilst calling himself king
he instigates the equivalent of a parliament and equal rights for the Skaa
people.

This book spends a great deal of time dealing with the political intrigue and
problems that occur due to the power vacuum left after the Lord Ruler's defeat
at the hands of Vin.

There is also a religious aspect to this book. After Kelsier's sacrifice, the
Skaa have put him at forefront of a growing religion. As his apprentice, and
the one who ultimately defeated the Lord Ruler, Vin is revered as a saint.

Elend struggles to maintain his rule of city when two armies begin to besiege
it. One lead by his father, Straff Venture, and the other by a nobleman called
Cett. Eventually he is deposed by  popular member of the assembly, Lord Penrod.

Vin spends her time protecting Elend from assassination. And the events of the
story put a strain on their romantic relationship.

A third army appears, lead by one of Elend's former friends. It is an army of
Koloss. Magically enhanced, and emotionally stunted, giant warriors. This
further exacerbates the stalemate between the city, and the besieging armies.

The crew make plans for defending the city and playing off the rulers against
each other. Sazed returns from time spent in the east with tales of the mists
killing people, and a rubbing of a metal tablet he and Marsh uncover in an
abandoned Obligator fortress.

This story further introduces the characters of OreSeur, Zane, and Tindwyl. The
former is the kandra who impersonated Renoux in book 1. Kandra are a race able
to impersonate a dead human by using their bones. The second is Straff
Venture's Mistborn and bastard son. And the third is another Terris Keeper who
comes to assist Elend in becoming a better leader. Tindwyl and Sazed develop
feelings for one another.

Zane spars with Vin throughout the book and plays on her doubts about her
relationship with Elend. Eventually the two take vengeance against Cett for an
assassination attempt. They mercilessly kill his personal guard, and Vin is
about to kill Cett before realising the assassination was an attempt by Zane
and Straff to destabilise the city and Cett. She confronts Zane and ultimately
defeats him with the help of OreSeur who turns out to be another kandra named
TenSoon.

Cett withdraws his forces. Sazed and the crew convince Elend, Vin and Spook to
leave the city in search of the Well of Ascension. In reality, they want the
three youngest of them to survive their inevitable defeat. After sneaking past
Venture's army they continue on.

Straff withdraws his army and the Koloss attack. His intention is to retake the
city after the fighting is done. Vin realises that the Well of Ascension is
within the city and turns around. She arrives just in time to save Sazed and
most of the civilian population by taking control of the Koloss with her
Allomancy.

After the battle, Vin assassinates Straff and his generals. She forces the
remaining leader to swear allegiance to Elend along with Cett and the forces
that usurped Elend's crown from him, thus naming him emperor.

Vin then discovers the Well of Ascension within the city and unwittingly
unleashes a great evil entity that has been manipulating the legends of Alendi
and the Well of Ascension for hundreds of years. During this sequence Elend is
killed but then revived with the powers of a Mistborn.

Some reviewers complain that this book is the slowest of the trilogy. I
disagree. I found the politics within it interesting, Elend's optimism and good
nature polarise well with the other rulers. The eventual acceptance of both
Vina and Elend in their roles is handled well. Sazed is developed further and
quickly became one of my favourite viewpoint characters. We also see more of
the crew and their relationships. We get an insight into how everyone is coping
with Kelsier's death and the Lord Ruler's demise. More is revealed around
Allomancy, including a new, powerful, metal that Vin uses to help her combat
the threats around her. The ending sets up the final book well, and sets the
stakes even higher.

## Book 3: The Hero of Ages

<img
  alt='Book 3: The Hero of Ages'
  src='{{ "assets/mistborn/Hero-of-Ages.jpg" | absolute_url  }}'
  class='blog-image'
/>


