---
layout: post
title: The Hiring Process Problem
---

With the fast moving world of tech there's bound to be a lot of people moving
careers, whether forced by company layoffs, or the need for personal growth.
But how do companies go about hiring people?

I've been participating in interviews, both as an interviewee and interviewer
almost since the start of my career in software development. Originally, at IDR
Solutions I joined as a placement student (for Americans, think of this as a
paid internship for a year) and continued to part-time then full-time from
there, and as part of that had some involvement in interviewing and hiring
other placement students. Fast forwarding on from there, at BAE Applied
Intelligence (Detica), I was involved both in interviewing placement students,
as well as full time hires and contractors. Now, in my tenure at Holland and
Barrett, I've interviewed many people for various positions in the Data
Engineering team, including for roles above my own. In the latter two jobs I
was partially and wholly responsible for designing various questions or tests
for evaluating candidates.

With my experience laid out, I'd like to explain the problems with hiring
processes, and the trade-offs businesses make around these problems. I say
trade-offs because, as with a lot of things in life, there are no clear best
practices or solutions.

## Hiring is Hard 

Naively, hiring a software engineer, programmer, coder etc. is easy:

You write a job specification, post it online, hand it to your HR team or give
it out to some recruiters. Then you just wait for the CVs to roll in, and then
pick the best candidates and interview them.

However, each step has a myriad of little problems:

### Job Specification

First off, the person writing the specification needs to know what they want.
This might seem like a non-issue, but in some businesses it's not the team or
team manager writing the specification. Instead, it could be a hiring manager
with limited knowledge on what is actually required beyond notes from the team.
They also need to know what is realistic for the role they are hiring for.

Thankfully, most businesses do involve the team being hired into with the
specification, but even then, there can be some issues. For example, the team
could accidentally narrow the search based on their urgent requirements over
their long term ones. For example, the team could put too much emphasis on
specific technologies, rather than looking for someone with more well rounded
skills that are applicable to a variety of technologies.

Job specifications can run the risk of being too demanding or over specific.
Care has to be taken in what is deemed "mandatory" and what is "nice to have"
when it comes to experience and skills, as this can put off many potential
candidates. Similarly, listing a lot of superfluous or implied requirements is
a waste. If someone has experience writing software, they will probably be able
to cope with using tools like Jira, Confluence or Git. It can still be worth noting
the technology stacks currently used in brief.

Even when developers and team leaders are the ones writing a specification they
run the risk of concentrating on the wrong things. Rather than a focus on
hiring a problem solver with some relatable experience to what they are
focussing on, they can get caught up on the specifics.

A note to would-be candidates: er on the side of seeing "years of
experience in X" requirements as "nice to haves" rather than mandatory
requirements, even if they are worded as required or in a mandatory list.
Primarily because years does not necessarily equate to knowledge, and it's
you'd be foolish to filter yourself out of applying for a role that looks like
a good fit solely because you're a year or two short on your work with a
specific technology.

### Getting the Specification seen

I'm not in the recruitment business or a member of HR, so I can't say how easy
or hard this process is from that perspective, but I've been on the other end
of it.

Some businesses put out job listings on their own websites. This can attract
people who want to work in that specific business or industry, but it requires
candidates to track down the job listing. Likewise, they might put out the job
listings on websites like LinkedIn, Monster etc. This casts a wider net, but
still requires candidates actively look for the role.

Businesses also reach out directly to potential candidates. This works really
well if you have a list of people in mind from previous interviews,
employment or recommendations from current employees. Some might scream
nepotism, but in reality this is just recognition of a good candidate from
personal experience.

Most businesses use either an internal or external (sometimes both) recruitment
team to find and approach candidates. This incurs an investment of time and
money, but is often quicker and more reliable than relying on passive job
listings or relying on recommendations. These are the recruiters who hit you up
constantly on LinkedIn or other websites. With external companies their
incentives are usually built around getting someone through the door AND
working for some fixed period. The latter requirement tempers them from
fielding lots of poor fits for a role.

An issue with recruiters can be similar to the issue with job specifications,
they aren't always as well versed with the real requirements of a job role. Of
course, the opposite can also be true, some recruiters are excellent at finding
a fit for a role and can recognise the unwritten requirements or superfluous
parts of a specification. 

### Screening Resumes/CVs

Depending on how a candidate is found, there is often the step of screening
their CV or Resume. This is a relatively simple process of comparing their
experiences to the job role and its specification.

Some companies employ automated screening, which varies wildly in its quality.
I've got no experience with such technology unfortunately, but I will say this,
if you're filtered out for a role you are interested in by some automated
system you still have a few options. You could reach out directly to a
recruiter at that business, or you could let it go. Odds are high that the
experience at a business that leans heavily on such automation won't be the
most people focussed business.


### Interviews

Interviews are, in my opinion, the most interesting, fun and scary parts of the
hiring process. They can vary wildly from business to business, can be split
into multiple stages over multiple days or all done in a single day/hour.

In the past, FAANG or Big 5 businesses were notorious for their multi-stage
interviews. They'd include cryptic or difficult questions and stages with
different teams. These have their place but most businesses aren't Google or
Amazon.

In my experience, both as an interviewee and interviewer, shorter interviews
are better. Short is still a relative term, but generally, you should be
respectful of candidates time, especially since they are likely already
employed elsewhere.

For programming and software development I am strong believer that there should
be a technical part to the interview. Be it a whiteboard test, in person
programming test, and/or technical questions.

The whiteboard test, is often maligned but, with a small amount of preparation,
can really help showcase a candidates approach to a problem. The expectation on
the interviewers side should not be to catch people out on small idiosyncrasies
or get an exact working answer. Rather, a whiteboard interview is about going
on a journey with the candidate, getting to know their approach, and having a
more natural discussion. Ideally, I don't think such an exercise should last
longer than 45 minutes, and questions should be at the appropriate level of
difficulty to ensure this.

An in person programming test serves a similar purpose to a whiteboard
interview, and works quite well in the age of remote working.
